---
label: 
title: Carte ethnographique de l'Europe
short_title: 
layout: entry
presentation: side-by-side
order: 131
object:
  - id: 4
---
This map of Europe, showing different ethnic and national groups marked in various shades, was created by Lithuanian politician Juozas Gabrys. Published in 1918, around the time of the Paris Peace Conference that ended the first World War, this period was a tumultuous time for national borders in Europe. State officials, scientists, and academics believed that peace could be secured and that any lingering conflicts could be solved through the ethnographic map. As early as 1914, France began to set up geographical commissions to start charting potential territorial issues and creating ethnographic maps with the intention of using them as major aids in decision making during peace negotiations.[^1] Isaiah Bowman, one of the heads of the U.S. delegation to the Paris Peace Conference was quoted as saying “each one of the Central European nationalities had its own bagful of statistical and cartographical tricks. When statistics failed, use was made of maps in color. It would take a huge monograph to contain an analysis of all the types of map forgeries that the war and the peace conference called forth.”[^2] The war was not only an effort to resolve imperial competition and anxieties but also an attempt to resolve questions about European nationalism.  

Ethnographic maps like the *Carte Ethnographique* claimed to be objective but were influenced by the political beliefs of their creators, the needs of the state, and flaws in statistical sciences and data collection in this period. For example, German mapmakers continually struggled to define who would count as German when collecting census data and converting it into visual representations including maps—should birthplace or current citizenship determine whether someone was categorically German? Did either of those characteristics mean that someone felt belonging or loyalty to a German state? Though scholars eventually settled on shared language as the most essential quality of German-ness, even that decision required arbitrary decisions that were not always standardized across cartographers—should they count the language spoken at home or the language they as their primary language? Should someone’s “mother tongue” determine whether they should be marked on a map as German?[^3]  

Looking at the *Carte Ethnographique*, notice which groups are labeled, the size of their territorial claims, and what colors Gabrys chose to represent them. Examine the size of Lithuanian territory and the variety in types of Lithuanians, and how Lithuanians are represented. Their group appears in bold red colors that stand out against the pale blues of the Poles and browns of the Russians. With these representational decisions, Gabrys revealed some of his political and personal biases.  

Gabrys wanted Lithuanians to be internationally recognized as a large and powerful ethnic group that deserved its own nation, separate from surrounding countries. He had been politically active before the first World War and played an important role in Lithuanian nationalist movements as in 1905, when he was an active part of the Lithuanian revolution against Russia and had to flee in the following year. By 1910, he had written several books about Lithuania, hoping to show to his readers that Lithuania had a unique history and a distinct culture that merited a separate nation.[^4] In 1911, Gabrys founded the Offices des Nationalités in 1911 to give Lithuanians and other ethnic minorities, who he saw as oppressed by larger countries, a chance to express their identities and problems. By 1918, when his *Carte Ethnographique de l’Europe* was published, Gabrys had already organized multiple conferences in France that brought together people from around the world to make their own claims about ethnicity and nation.[^5] 

Gabrys also revealed his support for Polish claims after the war. He marked what became known as the “Polish Corridor” as being populated by Poles, bolstering their posiiton against Germany. After WWI, the Allies had recognized Poland as an independent state after over 100 years without their own country and included the Polish Corridor as part of that territory. Germans were outraged by this decision, especially since it cut East Prussia off from the rest of their territory, arguing that Polish communities did not exist or were extremely minor influences in the area.[^6] Popular maps played an extremely important role in public discourse surrounding this debate on both Polish and German sides, and Polish claims to the corridor would have been bolstered by maps like this one by Gabrys.  

Looking at the map as a whole, the contemporary borders of European nations, outlined in black dotted lines, do not match up with the lines or shapes marking ethnic groups and nationalities. Some groups had more than 12 different nationalities within their borders, such as Russia, and other countries with relatively cohesive ethnic groups were missing parts of their group as it fanned out into a different nation, like Italy. By spatializing these relationships on his map, Gabrys made ethnic groups more visible and emphasized that political borders on maps did not always reflect the reality of the world.  


## Notes 

[^1]: Gilles Palsky, “Emmanuel de Martonne and the Ethnographical Cartography of Central Europe (1917–1920),” *Imago Mundi* 54, no. 1 (January 2002): 111–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085690208592961. 

[^2]: Quoted in Palsky, “Emmanuel de Martonne,” 113.  

[^3]: Jason D. Hansen, *Mapping the Germans: Statistical Science, Cartography, and the Visualization of the German Nation, 1848-1914* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015). See Chapter 1, “Counting Germans: The Search for Practical Means to Measure Nationality,” in particular. 

[^4]: Eberhard Demm, “The Propaganda of Juozas Gabrys for Lithuania before 1914,” *Journal of Baltic Studies* 21, no. 2 (Summer 1990): 121–30. See page 121. 
[^5]:Demm, “The Propaganda of Juozas Gabrys,” 123. 
[^6]: Joshua Hagen, “Mapping the Polish Corridor: Ethnicity, Economics and Geopolitics,” *Imago Mundi* 62, no. 1 (December 4, 2009): 63–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085690903319325. 