---
label: 
title: Carta general de la República Mexicana 
short_title: 
layout: entry
presentation: side-by-side
order: 132
object:
  - id: 10
---
> *“con más razón aún nostoros pordríamos decir, que nuestra historia está escrita con sólo decir que México y los Estados Unidos son vecinos. A lo menos la Francia y la Inglaterra están separadas por el canal de la Mancha; entre nuestra nación y la vecina no existe otro lindero que una simple línea matemática………..¡Dios salve á la República!!!*” -Antonio García Cubas, **Diccionario geográfico, histórico y biográfico de los Estado Unidos Mexicanos**, 1898

Writing toward the end of his career, Antonio García Cubas, one of the most important cartographers of Mexico, expressed concern over the lack of a clear, natural geographic border between Mexico and a land-hungry United States to the north. Having witnessed the Mexican American War that ended in 1848, when the United States forced Mexico to cede almost one-third of its territory, García Cubas recognized the influential role national maps could play in disputes about territory and nation. His quote from the end of the century—that Mexico’s “history is written simply by saying that Mexico and the United States are neighbors. At least France and England are separated by the Channel; between our nation and our neighbor there exists no other border than a simple mathematic line…God help the Republic!”—reflected his repeated efforts throughout his career to map the nation of Mexico and to present it as a unified nation with an inherent shared culture and history. [^1] 

Take, for example, García Cubas’s 1863 *Carta general de la República*. Usually, we think of borders as being made up of one line. Yet this map has two northern borders. This map was another version of a map from one of García Cubas’s earlier atlases, produced on a much larger scale. Measuring almost 4 feet by 5 feet, this map was the first national map of Mexico, made in Mexico by a Mexican cartographer. In this map, not only did García Cubas present a unified nation, but he also commented upon the relationship between the Untied States and Mexico by including two different northern borders of Mexico. One border is marked by the text, in Spanish, “Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,” and includes the area known as the Mesilla Valley. [ANNOTATION HERE] The other is marked with “Treaty of La Mesilla” and is highlighted in red, following the contours of present-day Mexico. [ANNOTATION HERE] 

Published shortly after the U.S. had taken a large portion of Mexico’s territory with these two different treaties, backed by military force, the dual borders on this *Carta general* marked each land cession by Mexico, tying these international events to histories that defined the nation of Mexico. By presenting Mexico as a complete nation with natural borders, García Cubas argued that other nations like the U.S. should respect its territorial claims. [^2] 

Notably, other versions of the map did not contain this double border. In the 1858 version, which was included in an atlas, García Cubas only outlined in red a single northern border and the map makes no mention of either the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo or Treaty of La Mesilla. [INCLUDE 1858 HERE—use ref {} to directory carta-general-1858?] The difference between the atlas and flat map versions perhaps suggests that Antonio García Cubas wanted to make a point about the power of cartography and Mexico as a nation when his map was published in larger format. 

 

## Notes  

[^1]: Translated quote from Raymond B. Craib, *Cartographic Mexico: A History of State Fixations and Fugitive Landscapes* (Durham: Duke University Press, 2004). See page 25. The original quote appears in Antonio García García Cubas, *Diccionario geográfico, histórico y biográfico de los Estado Unidos Mexicanos*, Tomo I (Mexico: 1898). See page 264.	 

[^2]: Craib, *Cartographic Mexico*. Ricardo Padrón, *The Spacious Word: Cartography, Literature and Empire in Early Modern Spain* (Chicago: University of Chicago press, 2004). Details on Gadsden Purchase and railroads from Torsten Kathke, *Wires That Bind: Nation, Region, and Technology in the Southwestern United States, 1854–1920* (Bielefeld, Germany: transcript Verlag, 2017).  
