--- 
label:  
title: Listen to the Line 
short_title:  
layout: entry 
presentation: side-by-side 
order: 124 
object: 
    - id: 30 

--- 
If Chicago were a symphony, who would perform it? With this unconventional score, composer John Cage invites us to listen to the city. Cage's score consists of 128 sets of addresses (or 430 addresses)—labeled quicksteps, waltzes, and marches for the number of beats in a measure—in the larger Chicago area. The score provides no specific instructions on what to do with these addresses. Cage also produced a map with the score where each line connects these randomly generated addresses. The sets of addresses are sometimes immediatley provocative such as waltz 12 connecting the City of Chicago Correctional Farm, the Oakbrook Polo Club, and the far South Side; but, more often, they require both a map and a spirit of adventure. 

To perform part of this score, we chose one set of addresses from each of the Quicksteps, Waltzes, and Marches that connected in ways that seemed walkable or traversable by public transit. We recorded sound on our phones as we moved between these places and then used a set of random operations with a deck of cards to select from these hours of sound. The Quickstep, Waltz, and March each has two, three, or four sections. The random operation determined how long each section would be and where the section would start from the master recording.  

<iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" allow="autoplay" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/soundcloud%253Atracks%253A2175988992&color=%23ff5500&auto_play=false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&show_reposts=false&show_teaser=true&visual=true"></iframe><div style="font-size: 10px; color: #cccccc;line-break: anywhere;word-break: normal;overflow: hidden;white-space: nowrap;text-overflow: ellipsis; font-family: Interstate,Lucida Grande,Lucida Sans Unicode,Lucida Sans,Garuda,Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;font-weight: 100;"><a href="https://soundcloud.com/david-weimer-622550686/john-cage-a-dip-in-the-lake" title="An Interpretation of A Dip in the Lake" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">An Interpretation of A Dip in the Lake</a>.</div> 